I'm pleased to say joining us from Aman
is Jordan's Minister of Foreign Affairs
Ian Safi foreign minister welcome to
aler it's good to have you with us first
of all I'd like to start with both those
attacks in Iraq and in Syria given the
ongoing very high tensions in the region
and attacks going from the Red Sea all
the way to the border with Lebanon
what's your view about what's going on
the dangers of this spilling over into
something more
fundamental well sir from from the very
beginning we warned that this aggression
on Gaza carries the very serious risk of
spilling over into the rest of the
region added to that now that the
Israeli Prime Minister might be uh
consciously provoking uh confrontations
on other fronts particularly with
Lebanon and other parts of the region to
delay the political Reckoning that he
will have to face and also to navigate
around the differences that we're seeing
emerging with the United States and
others in terms of what the vision for
the future is so to uh belittle the
impact of that difference with the US
and others and to delay the political
Reckoning prime minister Netanyahu might
be uh working towards uh provoking other
fronts uh to which he would drag the
west and then uh we'll be looking at a
very uh very very serious uh escalation
of indeed so so foreign minister what is
Jordan what are Arab states doing to try
and prevent that spill over and frankly
is it
enough well I mean we're doing
everything we can but ultimately it is
the Israeli government it's Israel that
is defying not just the will of the
Arabs but the will of the whole
International Community when it
continues with ag with the its
aggression and I think we're working
with all our partners the day after
tomorrow I'll be uh visiting with all
European foreign ministers along with
the foreign minister of Saudi Arabia and
Egypt uh to try again and rally support
not only for ending the aggression but
to make sure that uh we all come
together for behind a plan that would uh
end occupation and put the uh the region
on an irreversible path towards peace uh
here we're faced with an Israeli
government that is defying the inter the
International Community that continues
with its violation of international law
that continues to uh push the region
towards the abys of regional war and uh
we have an International Community that
yet uh to come and demand unequivocally
an end of of Israel Wars and ultimately
we'll have to face the very difficult
question which is if the whole world
including the United States is saying
that the only path forward is a path
that would fulfill the rights of the
Palestinians to freedoms and statehood
on the basis of the two-state solution
and the Israeli government is saying no
and is defying them then what what is
going to be to the response is it more
service to the two-state solution or is
it a a real plan supported by a real
will where is that where with respect
where is that plan coming from where is
that plan coming from I mean many would
say that the Arab State should be doing
a lot more to try and make that
happen uh we are uh in consultation with
a lot of our brethren in the region uh
we have the ideas we're articulating our
plans and basically what we want is uh
the a plan that would start from the end
game I.E it starts by recognizing the
independent Palestinian State on the
basis of June 4 1967 lines with occupied
Jerusalem as capital and then with the
rest of the internation Community we
walk back on measures that would take us
there we cannot engage in another
open-ended process because we've seen
what that has done in the past so we and
the Arab world to do our share now we're
looking and we're talking to uh our
friends in the International Community
particular particularly to the United
States uh to come and Lead an effort
that would take us down okay and on the
United States the Biden Administration
has been forthright in the need for a
two State solution publicly at least
something that the Israeli Prime
Minister said could never happen yet
after a phone conversation between Biden
Netanyahu yesterday uh Joe Biden said
the creation of an independent
Palestinian State uh was still possible
while Benjamin Netanyahu is still in
office do you think that is the
case I think it's very clear that prime
minister n who never wanted a two-state
solution even before yesterday he said
he's proud he had prevented the
establishment of the Palestinian State
earlier he said he had suffocated the
aspirations of of Palestinians for
Freedom so we're dealing with a with a
prime minister who now tactically
delaying the war to prolong his term in
office but but is acting on an agenda
that does not want to see the two-state
solution and and that's a challenge that
the whole world is going to face either
we allow uh this government with its
radical racist extremist agenda to Doom
the future of the region to more
conflict or war or we all come together
and say we will not allow Netanyahu to
uh determine the future of this region
just as he doomed the past of the region
to more conflict and if I may just
another issue that we should not lose
sight of is that as we talk about the
future we need to remember that the
Israeli aggression on Gaza is continuing
the killing of Palestinians is
continuing the destruction of of the
whole infrastructure of Gaza including
the he Health infrastructure is
continuing and only two two days ago on
Wednesday Israel attacked our own field
Hospital one of very very few hospitals
that are offering services to the
Palestinians even though Israel knows
the coordinates of the hospital it knows
that this is a hospital Man by Jordanian
uh uh medical staff uh and and and yet
it went ahead and directly targeted the
hospital so that speaks to a systematic
Israeli policy of trying to make life
impossible for people in Gaza and then
ultimately fulfill its declared
objective of many of its ministers to
push gazans out so as we so given that
given that foreign minister given your
position and given the position the
state of position of Arab states why is
it that it came down to South Africa to
uh take Israel to court over genocide uh
to the international court of justice
over genocide and and not say Jordan or
other Arab
states we're we we've come very clearly
supporting the case that Africa took to
the icj I think it's very important with
the symbolism that South Africa has that
the case was presented by South Africa
and uh the court has its own procedures
and at the right time uh when uh the
time comes for uh member states to make
their interventions we will make that
but I think again it's extremely
symbolic extremely important extremely
powerful that the state that the case
was uh was was raised by by South Africa
and all of us in the Arab and Muslim
world when we met in Saudi Arabia
in the joint Arab and Muslim Summit
we've entrusted the both secretariats of
both the league and the o to prepare all
the legal documents that we will use
going forward so I I think uh we have a
plan here and we're acting in accordance
with it and if the Court decides for uh
provisional measures uh and then goes
forward to examine the case then uh all
of us I believe and I can speak for
Jordan now uh will be doing what we to
do and and submit uh uh uh cases could
you expand on what doing what you need
to do means and and what uh the result
of your talks with Palestinian Authority
and the Egyptians and and further talks
that you're going to have that you've
talked about and how you would
collectively respond to the concept of
Israeli control a total Israeli control
west of the Jordan
River I mean we we've always rejected
that uh we always said that this would
only mean War so any Israeli
propositions particularly by this
government uh to maintain control over
the occupied Palestinian territories
including Gaza and East Jerusalem is
something that we've always stood
against and we'll continue to stand
against and we'll continue to Rally
public opinion to see to understand the
danger inherent of allowing nanaho to
proceed with his policies uh as I said
we're all working to put forward
proposals we're alreadying consultation
it's not a question of plans to be
honest it's a question of will the will
of Israel to reengage in a serious
negotiations to achieve peace and the
will of the International Community to
take action against Israel if it
continues to deny this region uh the the
the the peace that it deserves on the
court S as I said uh we support the case
that South Africa have have made uh we
will submit when the time for
submissions of the legal arguments comes
and we the court procedures on that all
right for a minister one more question
uh Israel has so far ruled out calls for
to allow the international recognize
Palestinian Authority to govern both
gazra and the occupied West Bank that is
apparently Washington's preferred option
where do Jordan
stand we stand I mean as we said from
the very beginning uh Gaza is part and
partially of the occupied Palestinian
territory any discussion of Gaza and the
day after has to be part and parcel of a
broader approach that would include the
occupied W bank and occupied Jerusalem
and we do not accept any Israeli
presence in Gaza nor do we accept any
Israeli control of any parts of Gaza
this has been the argument that we've
made from the very beginning this is the
position that we're rallying support for
and let me just add one thing and and
this is something that for for for the
world to recognize even the US which is
providing Israel with support says
Israel has to conduct the aggression in
accordance with international law it's
not it says the Israel has to allow
sufficient humanitarian supplies into
Gaza it is not it says the only path
forward is a two-state solution that
would realize a Palestinian state the
Palestinian government is saying no it
will not allow that so I think it should
be clear to the whole world now which
party is responsible for the terror that
has been engulfing our part of the world
which party is responsible for denying
our region the peace it deserves and
which party is driving this conflict
further into abys and we've got to
remember as Israel continues with its
aggression on Gaza it is also conducting
a quieter war in the West Bank where it
is suffocating the Palestinians
economically it's denying them the right
to free worship both Muslims and
Christians it is killing Palestinians
arresting Palestinians and we have to
remember that Ramadan is around the
corner and that's a month where where we
always have worked against the flare up
of violence but in this kind of
condition I think the W the West Bank
was boiling and and if the West Bank
explodes under the pressure from Israeli
aggressive policies then I think we'll
be talking about a much much much
dangerous scenario which would even have
POS the more serious threat of dragging
us all into a regional expansion of the
of this world all right Jordan's
Minister of Foreign Affairs I Minister
fi thank
you thank you sir